ipcc INERCOMRANMENTAL PANEL ON climate change CLIMATE CHANGE 2023 Synthesis Report Summary for Policymakers A Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change D WMO UNEP



CLIMATE CHANGE 2023 Synthesis Report Summary for Policymakers Edited by Hoesung Lee Chairman IPCC The Core Writing Team Synthesis Report IPCC Jose Romero Head, Technical Support Unit IPCC Core Writing Team Hoesung Lee (Chair), Katherine Calvin (USA), Dipak Dasgupta (India/USA), Gerhard Krinner (France/Germany), Aditi Mukherji (India), Peter Thorne (Ireland/United Kingdom), Christopher Trisos (South Africa), Jose Romero (Switzerland), Paulina Aldunce (Chile), Ko Barrett (USA), Gabriel Blanco (Argentina), William W. L. Cheung (Canada), Sarah L. Connors (France/United Kingdom), Fatima Denton (The Gambia), Aida Diongue-Niang (Senegal), David Dodman (Jamaica/United KingdomNetherlands), Matthias Garschagen (Germany), Oliver Geden (Germany), Bronwyn Hayward (New Zealand), Christopher Jones (United Kingdom), Frank Jotzo (Australia), Thelma Krug (Brazil), Rodel Lasco (Philippines), June-Yi Lee (Republic of Korea), Valerie Masson-Delmotte (France), Malte Meinshausen (Australia/Germany), Katja Mintenbeck Germany),Abdalah Mokssit (Morocco), Friederike E. L.Otto (United Kingdom/Germany), Minal Pathak (India), Anna Pirani (Italy), Elvira Poloczanska (United Kingdom/Australia), Hans-Otto Portner (Germany), Aromar Revi (India), Debra C. Roberts (South. Africa), Joyashree Roy (ndia/Thailand),Alex C. Ruane (USA), Jim Skea (United Kingdom), Priyadarshi R. Shukla (India), Raphael Slade (United Kingdom), Aimee Slangen (The Netherlands), Youba Sokona (Mali), Anna A. Sorensson (Argentina), Melinda Tignor (USA/Germany), Detlef van Vuuren (The Netherlands), Yi-Ming Wei (China), Harald'Winkler (South Africa), Panmao Zhai (China), Zinta Zommers (Latvia) Technical Support Unit for the Synthesis Report Jose Romero (Switzerland), Jinmi Kim (Republic of Korea), Erik F Haites (Canada), Yonghun Jung (Republic of Korea), Robert Stavins (USA), Arlene Birt (USA), Meeyoung Ha (Republic of Korea), Dan Jezreel A. Orendain (Philippines), Lance Ignon (USA), Semin Park (Republic of Korea), Youngin Park (Republic of Korea) Referencing this report: IPCC, 2023:Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. Contribution ofWorking Groups, ll and Ill to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Corel Writing Team, H. Lee and JI Romero (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 1-34, doi: 10.59327MPCCJAR6-9789291691647.001

Extended Writing Team Review Editors Jean-Charles Hourcade (France), Francis X. Johnson (Thailand/Sweden), Shonali Pachauri (Austria/India), Nicholas P. Simpson Paola Arias (Colombia), Mercedes Bustamante (Brazil), Ismail Elgizouli (Sudan), Gregory Flato (Canada), Mark Howden (Australia), Carlos Mendez (Venezuela), Joy. Jacqueline Pereira (Malaysia), Ramon Pichs-Madruga (Cuba), Steven KI Rose (USA), Yamina Saheb (Algeria/France), Roberto Sanchez Rodriguez (Mexico), Diana Urge-Vorsatz (Hungary), Cunde Xiao (China), Noureddine Yassaa (Algeria) Andres Alegria (Germany/Honduras), Kyle. Armour (USA), Birgit Bednar-Friedl (Austria), Kornelis Blok (The Netherlands), Gueladio Cisse GotoriendMleartosnaftawal Frank Dentener (EU/Netherlands), Siri Eriksen (Norway), Erich Fischer (Switzerland), Gregory Garner (USA), Celine Guivarch (France), Marjolijin Haasnoot (The Netherlands), Gerrit Hansen (Germany), Mathias Hauser (Switzerland), Ed Hawkins (UK), Tim Hermans (The Netherlands), Robert Kopp (USA), Noemie Leprince-Ringuet (France), Jared Lewis (Australia/New Zealand), Debora Ley (Mexico/Guatemala), Chloe Ludden Germany/France), Leila Niamir (Iran/The Netherlands/Austria), Zebedee Nicholls (Australia), Shreya Some (India/Thailand), Sophie Szopa (France), Blair Trewin (Australia), Kaj-Ivar van der Wijst (The Netherlands), Gundula Winter (The Netherlands/Germany), Maximilian Witting (Germany) Hoesung Lee (Chair, IPCC), Amjad Abdulla (Maldives), Edvin Aldrian (Indonesia), Ko Barrett (United States of America), Eduardo Calvo (Peru), Carlo Carraro (Italy), Diriba Korecha Dadi (Ethiopia), Fatima Driouech (Morocco), Andreas Fischlin (Switzerland), Jan Fuglestvedt (Norway), Thelma Krug (Brazil), Nagmeldin G.E. Mahmoud (Sudan), Valerie Masson-Delmotte (France), Carlos Mendez (Venezuela), Joy Jacqueline Pereira (Malaysia), Ramon Pichs-Madruga (Cuba), Hans-Otto Portner (Germany), Andy Reisinger (New Zealand), Debra C. Roberts (South Africa), Sergey Semenov (Russian Federation), Priyadarshi Shukla (India), Jim Skea (United Kingdom), Youba Sokona (Mali), Kiyoto Tanabe (Japan), Muhammad Irfan Tariq (Pakistan), Diana Urge-Vorsatz (Hungary), Carolina Vera (Argentina), Pius Yanda (United Republic of Tanzania), Noureddine Yassaa (Algeria), Taha M. Zatari (South Africa/Zimbabwe), Chandni Singh (India), Adelle Thomas (Bahamas), Edmond Totin (Benin) Contributing Authors Scientific Steering Committee (Saudi Arabia), Panmao Zhai (China) Visual Conception and Information Design Arlene Birt (USA), Meeyoung Ha (Republic of Korea) Cover: Designed by Meeyoung Ha, IPCCSYR1 TSU "Fog opening the dawn" by Chung Jin Sil hopilowowkmagakrikna O KMA Photo Reference Thel Weather and Climate Photography & Video Contest 2021, Korea Meteorological Administration THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE Ol Intergovemmental Panel on Climate Change, 2023 The designations employed and the presentation of material on maps do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on thej part of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concerning thel legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The mention of specific companies or products does noti imply that they are endorsed or recommended by IPCC in preference to others of a similar nature, which are not mentioned or advertised. The right of publication in print, electronic and any other form and in any language is reserved by the IPCC. Short extracts from this publication may be reproduced without authorization provided that complete source is clearly indicated. Editorial correspondence and requests to publish, reproduce or translate articles in part or in whole should be addressed to: IPCC c/oWorld Meteorological Organization (WMO) 7bis, avenue del lal Paix'Tel.: +41 22 730 8208 P.O. Box 2300 Fax: +41 22 7308025 CH 1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland E-mail: <EMAIL> <URL>

Sources cited in this Synthesis Report References for material contained in this report are given in curly brackets 0 at the end of each paragraph. Int the Summary for Policymakers, the references refer to ther numbers oft the sections, figures, tables and boxes in the underlying In the Introduction and Sections of the longer report, the references refer to the contributions of the Working Groups L,112 and III (WGI, WGII, WGIII) to the Sixth. Assessment Report and other IPCC Reports (in italicized curly brackets), or to other sections Introduction and Topics of this Synthesis Report. of the Synthesis Report itself (in round brackets). The following abbreviations have been used: SPM: Summary for Policymakers TS: Technical Summary ES: Executive Summary of a chapter Numbers denote specific chapters and sections of a report. Other IPCC reports cited in this Synthesis Report: SR1.5: Global Warming of 1.5degC SRCCL: Climate Change and Land SROCC: The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate



Summary for Policymakers This Summary for Policymakers should be cited as: IPCC, 2023: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. Contribution ofWorking Groups 1, Iland Ill to the Sixth. Assessment Report ofi the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core'Writing Team, H. Lee and. JI Romero (eds.)). IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 1-34, doi: 10593271PCC/AR6-979291631647001



Summary for Policymakers Introduction This Synthesis Report (SYR) of the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) summarises the state of knowledge of climate change, its widespread impacts and risks, and climate change mitigation and adaptation. It integrates the main findings of the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) based on contributions from the three Working Groups', and the three Special Reports'. The summary for Policymakers (SPM) is structured in three parts: SPM.A Current Status and Trends, SPM.B Future Climate Change, Risks, and This report recognizes the interdependence of climate, ecosystems and biodiversity, and human societies; the value of diverse forms of knowledge; and the close linkages between climate change adaptation, mitigation, ecosystem health, human well-being Based on scientific understanding, key findings can be formulated as statements of fact or associated with an assessed level of Long-Term Responses, and SPM.C Responses in the Near Term:. and sustainable development, and reflects the increasing diversity of actors involved in climate action. confidence using the IPCC calibrated language". Thet threel Working Group contributions to AR6 are: AR6 Climate Change 2021:The Physical Science Basis; AR6 Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability; and AR6 Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Their assessments cover scientific literature accepted for publication The three Special Reports are: Global Warming of 1.5degC (2018): an IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5degC above pre-industrial levels andi related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, int the context ofs strengthening the global response tot thet threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty (SR1.5); Climate Change and Land (2019): an IPCC Special Report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems (SRCCL); and The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (2019) (SROCC).1 The Special Reports cover scientific literature accepted for publication respectively by 151 May 2018, 7A April 2019 and respectively by 31 January 2021, 1 September 2021 and 11 October 2021. 15 May 2019. In this report, the near term is defined ast the period until 2040. The long term is defined as the period beyond 2040. Each finding is grounded in an evaluation of underlying evidence and agreement. The IPCC calibrated language uses five qualifiers to express a level of confidence: very low, low, medium, high and very high, and typeset in italics, for example, medium confidence. The following terms are used toi indicate the assessed likelihood of an outcome or al result: virtually certain 99-100% probability, veryl likely 90-100%, likely 66-100%, more likely than not >50-100%, about as likely as not 33-66%, unlikely 0-33%, very unlikely 0-10%, exceptionally unlikely 0-1%. Additional terms (extremely likely 95-100%; and extremely unlikely 0-5%) are also used when appropriate. Assessed likelihood ist typeset ini italics, e.g, very likely." Thisi is consistent with AR5 and the other AR6 Reports.

Summary for Policymakers A. Current Status and Trends Observed Warming and its Causes A.1 Human activities, principally through emissions of greenhouse gases, have unequivocally caused global warming, with global surface temperature reaching 1.1degC above 1850-1900 in 2011-2020. Global greenhouse gas emissions have continued to increase, with unequal historical and ongoing contributions arising from unsustainable. energy use, land use and land-use change, lifestyles and patterns of consumption and production across regions, between and within countries, and among individuals (high confidence). (2.1, Figure 2.1, A.1.1 Global surface temperature was 1.09 [0.95 to 1.20]degC5 higher in 2011-2020 than 1850-1900, with larger increases over land (1.59 [1.34 to 1.83]degC) than overt the ocean (0.88 [0.68t to1.01]"Q.Global surface temperature in the first two decades of the 21*century (2001-2020) was 0.99 [0.84 to 1.10JdegC higher than 1850-1900. Global surface temperature has increased faster since 1970 than in any other 50-year period over at least the last 2000 years (high confidence). A.1.2 The likely range of total human-caused global surface temperature increase from 1850-1900 to 2010-2019'1 is 0.8degCto 1.3degC, with a best estimate of 1.07degC. Over this period, iti is likely that well-mixed greenhouse gases (GHGS) contributed a warming of 1.0degC to 2.0degC, and other human drivers (principally aerosols) contributed a cooling of 0.0degC to 0.8degC, natural (solar and volcanic) drivers changed global surface temperature by -0.1degC to +0.1degC, and internal variability A.1.3 Observed increases in well-mixed GHG concentrations since around 1750 are unequivocally caused by GHG emissions fromhuman activities over this period. Historical cumulative net CO, emissions from 1850 to 20191 were 2400: * 240 GtCO, of which more than half (58%) occurred between 1850 and 1989, and about 42% occurred between 1990 and 2019 (high confidence). In 2019, atmospheric CO, concentrations (410 parts per million) were higher than at any time in at least 2 million years (high contidence), and concentrations of methane (1866 parts per billion) and nitrous oxide (332 parts per billion) were higher than at any time in at least 800,000 years (very high confidence). (2.1.1, Figure 2.1) A.1.4 Global net anthropogenic GHG emissions have been estimated to be 59: * 6.6 GtCO,-eq? in 2019, about 12% (6.5 GtCO,-eq) higher than in 2010 and 54% (21 GtCOz-eq) higher than in 1990, with thel largest share and growth in gross GHG emissions occurring in CO; from fossil fuels combustion and industrial processes (CO2-FFI) followed by methane whereas the highest relative growth occurred in fluorinated gases (F-gases), starting from low levels in 1990.. Average annual GHG emissions during 2010-2019 were higher than in any previous decade on record, while the rate of growth between 2010 and 2019 (1.3% yr') was lower than that between 2000 and 2009 (2.1% yr"). In 2019, approximately 79% of global GHG Figure 2.2) (2.1.1, Figure 2.1) changed it by -0.2degC to +0.2degC. (2.1.1, Figure 2.1) Ranges given throughout the SPM represent very likely ranges (5-95% range) unless otherwise stated. The estimated increase in global surface temperature since AR5 is principally duet to further warming since 2003-2012/0.19/0.1616 0.22"Q.Additionaly, methodological advances and new datasets have provided a more complete spatial representation of changes in surface temperature, including in the Arctic. These and other improvements have also increased the estimate of global surface temperature change by approximately 0.1degC, but this increase The period distinction with A.1.1 arises because the attribution studies consider this slightly earlier period. The observed warming to 2010-2019 Contributions from emissions to the 2010-2019 warming relative to 1850-1900 assessed from radiative forcing studies are: CO,; 0.8 [0.5 to 1.2]degC; GHG emission metrics are used to express emissions of different greenhouse gasesi in a common unit Aggregated GHG emissions in this report ares statedi in COr equivalents (CO2-eq) using the Global Warming Potential with at time horizon of 100 years GWP100) with values based on the contribution ofWorking Group Ito the AR6. The AR6 WGI and'WGIII reports contain updated emission metric values, evaluations of different metrics with regard tor mitigation objectives, and assess new approaches to aggregating gases. The choice of metric depends on the purpose oft the analysis and all GHG emission metrics havel limitations and uncertainties, given that they simplify the complexity of the physical climate system and its response to past and future GHG emissions. (2.1.1) does not represent additional physical warming since AR5. is1.06 [0.88 to 1.21]degC. methane 0.5 [0.31 to 0.8JdegC; nitrous oxide 0.1 [0.01 to 0.2JdegC and fluorinated gases 0.1 [0.01 to 0.2JdegC. (2.1.1)

Summary for Policymakers emissions came from the sectors of energy, industry, transport, and buildings together and 22%'from agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU). Emissions reductions in CO2-FFI due to improvements in energy intensity of GDP and carbon intensity of energy, have been less than emissions increases from rising global activity levels in industry, A.1.5 Historical contributions of CO; emissions vary substantially across regions in terms of total magnitude, but also in terms of contributions to CO2-FFI and net CO2 emissions from land use, land-use change and forestry (CO--LULUCF). In 2019, around 35% of the global population live in countries emitting more than 9 tCOz-eq per capita"" (excluding CO2-LULUCF) while 41% live in countries emitting less than 3 tCOr-eq per capita; of the latter a substantial share lacks access to modern energy services. Least Developed Countries (LDCS) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS) have much lower per capita emissions (1.7 tCO2-eq and 4.6 tCO2-eq, respectively) than the global average (6.9 tCO2-eq), excluding CO2-LULUCF. The 10% of households with the highest per capita emissions contribute 34-45% of global consumption-based household GHG emissions, while the bottom 50% contribute 13-15%. (high confidence) (2.1.1, energy supply, transport, agriculture and buildings. (high confidence) (2.1.1) Figure 2.2) Observed Changes and Impacts A.2 Widespread and rapid changes in the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and biosphere have occurred. Human-caused climate change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region across the globe. This has led to widespread adverse impacts and related losses and damages to nature and people (high confidence). Vulnerable communities who have historically contributed the least to current climate change are disproportionately affected (high confidence). (2.1, Table 2.1, Figure 2.2, Figure 2.3} (Figure SPM.1) A.2.1 Itis unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, ocean and land. Global mean sea level increased by 0.20 [0.15 to 0.25] m between 1901 and 2018. The average rate of sea level rise was 1.3 [0.6 to 2.1] mm yr'between 1901 and 1971, increasing to 1.9 (0.81 to 2.9] mm yr'between 1971 and 2006, and further increasing to 3.7 [3.2 to 4.2] mm yrl between 2006 and 2018 (high confidence). Human influence was very likely the main driver of these increases since at least 1971. Evidence of observed changes in extremes such as heatwaves, heavy precipitation, droughts, and tropical cyclones, and, in particular, their attribution to human influence, has further strengthened since AR5. Human influence has likely increased the chance of compound extreme events since the 1950s, including increases in the frequency of concurrent heatwaves and droughts (high confidence). (2.1.2, Table. 2.1, Figure 2.3, Figure 3.4) (Figure SPM.1) A.2.2 Approximately 3.3 to 3.6 billion people live in contexts that are highly vulnerable to climate change. Human and ecosystem vulnerability are interdependent. Regions and people with considerable development constraints have high vulnerability to climatic hazards. Increasing weather and climate extreme events have exposed millions of people to acute food insecurity"? and reduced water security, with the largest adverse impacts observed in many locations and/or communities in Africa, Asia, Central and South America, LDCS, Small Islands and the Arctic, and globally for Indigenous Peoples, small-scale food producers and low-income households. Between 2010 and 2020, human mortality from floods, droughts and storms was 15 times higher in highly vulnerable regions, compared to regions with very low A.2.3 Climate change has caused substantial damages, and increasingly irreversible losses, in terrestrial, freshwater, cryospheric, and coastal and open ocean ecosystems (high confidence). Hundreds of local losses of species have been driven by increases in the magnitude of heat extremes (high confidence) with mass mortality events recorded on land and in the ocean (very high confidence). Impacts on some ecosystems are approaching irreversibility such as the impacts of hydrological changes resulting from the retreat of glaciers, or the changes in some mountain (medium contidence) and Arctic ecosystems driven by permafrost thaw (high confidence). (2.1.2, Figure 2.3) (Figure SPM.1) vulnerability. (high confidence) (2.1.2, 4.4) (Figure SPM.1) GHG emission levels are rounded tot two significant digits; as a consequence, small differences in sums due to rounding may occur. (2.1.1) Territorial emissions. Acutet food insecurity can occur ata any time with a severity that threatens lives, livelihoods or both, regardless of the causes, context or duration, asi al result of shocks risking determinants off food security andi nutrition, andi is used to assess the need for humanitarian action. (2.1)

Summary for Policymakers A.2.4 Climate change has reduced food security and affected water security, hindering efforts to meet Sustainable Development Goals (high confidence). Although overall agricultural productivity has increased, climate change has slowed this growth over the past 50 years globally (medium confidence), with related negative impacts mainly in mid and low latitude regions but positive impacts in some high latitude regions (high confidence). Ocean warming and ocean acidification have adversely affected food production from fisheries and shellfish aquaculture in some oceanic regions (high confidence). Roughly half off the world's population currently experience severe water scarcity for at least part of the year due to a combination of climatic and non-climatic drivers (medium confidence). (2.1.2, Figure 2.3) A.2.5 In all regions increases in extreme heat events have resulted in human mortality and morbidity (very high confidence). The occurrence of climate-related food-borne and water-borne diseases (very high confidence) and the incidence of vector-borne diseases (high confidence) have increased. In assessed regions, some mental health challenges are associated with increasing temperatures (high confidence), trauma from extreme events (very high confidence), and loss of livelihoods and culture (high confidence). Climate and weather extremes are increasingly driving displacement in Africa, Asia, North America (high confidence), and Central and South America (medium confidence), with small island states in the Caribbean and South Pacific being disproportionately affected relative to their small population size (high A.2.6 Climate change has caused widespread adverse impacts and related losses and damages" to nature and people that are unequally distributed across systems, regions and sectors. Economic damages from climate change have been detected in climate-exposed sectors, such as agriculture, forestry, fishery, energy, and tourism. Individual livelihoods have been affected through, for example, destruction of homes and infrastructure, and loss of property and income human health and food security, with adverse etfects on gender and social equity. (high confidence) (2.1.2) (Figure SPM.1) A.2.7 Inurban areas, observed climate change has caused adverse impacts on human health, livelihoods and keyi infrastructure. Hot extremes have intensified in cities. Urban infrastructure, including transportation, water, sanitation and energy systems have been compromised by extreme and slow-onset events', with resulting economic losses, disruptions of services and negative impacts to well-being. Observed adverse impacts are concentrated amongst economically and (Figure SPM.1) confidence). (2.1.2, Figure 2.3) (Figure SPM.1) socially marginalised urban residents. (high confidence) (2.1.2) In this report, the term'losses and damages'refers to adverse observed impacts and/or projected risks and can be economic and/or non-economic (see Slow-onset events are described among the dimatic-impact drivers of the AR6 WGI and refer to the risks and impacts associated with eg, increasing temperature means, desertification, decreasing precipitation, loss of biodiversity, land and forest degradation, glacial retreat and related impacts, ocean Annexl : Glossary). acidification, sea level rise and salinization. (2.1.2)

Summary for Policymakers Adverse impacts from human-caused climate change will continue to intensify a) Observed widespread and substantial impacts and related losses and damages attributed to climate change Water availability and food production Health and well-being Key Observed increase in climate impacts tol human systems and ecosystems Adversei impacts Adverse and positive impacts Climate-driven no globala assessment changes ofi observed, impact direction Confidence in attribution to climate change *.* High or very high confidence * Medium confidence Low confidence Physical Agriculture/ Animal and Fisheries Infectious Heat, Mental Displacement assessed at global level water crop livestock yields and diseases malnutrition health Cities, settlements and infrastructure Biodiversity and ecosystems Inland Flood/storm Damages Damages Terrestrial Freshwater Ocean flooding and induced toi infra to key, ecosystems ecosystems ecosystems b) Impacts are driven by changes in multiple physical climate conditions, which are increasingly attributed to human influence Attribution of observed physical climate changes tol human influence: availability production health and aquaculture andl harm from wildfire productivity production June Il associated damages in structure economic damages coastal areas sectors Includes changes in ecosystem structure, species ranges and seasonal timing Medium confidence EE drought Likely Very likely Virtually certain pH acidification extremes Increase in Increase Increasel in Increase Glacier Global sea Upper Increase agricultural in fire compound in heavy retreat level rise ocean in hot & ecological weather flooding precipitation )The extent to which current and future generations will experience a hotter and different world depends on choices now and in the near term 2011-20201 was around 1.1degC than 1850-1900 1980 2020 scenarios: very high high intermediate low very low born in2020 future experiences depend on 2060 Future emissions L how we address climate change 1900 1940 2100 -warming continues beyond 2100 RC Global temperature change above 1850-1900 levels 0 051152 2.5 3 3.5 4 70 years oldin2 2090 born in1 1980 70 years oldi in 2050 born in1 1950 70 years oldin2 2020 Figure SPM.1: (a) Climate change has already caused widespread impacts and related losses and damages on human systems and altered terrestrial, freshwater and ocean ecosystems worldwide. Physical water availability includes balance of water available from various sources including ground water, water quality and demand for water. Global mental health and displacement assessments reflect only assessed regions. Confidence levels reflect the assessment of attribution of the observedi impact to climate change. (b) Observed impacts are connected to physical dimate changes including manyt that have been attributed to human influence such as the selected dimatic impact-drivers shown. Confidence and likelihood levels reflect the assessment of attribution oft the observed dimatic impact-driver to human influence. (c) Observed (1900-2020) and projected (2021-2100) changes in global surface temperature (relative to 1850-1900), which are linked to changes in dimate conditions and impacts, illustrate how the dimate has already changed and will change along the lifespan of three

Summary for Policymakers representative generations (born in 1950, 1980 and 2020). Future projections (2021-2100) of changes in global surface temperature are shown for very low (SSP1-1.9), low (SSP1-2.6), intermediate (SSP2-4.5), high (SSP3-7.0) and very high (SSP5-8.5) GHG emissions scenarios. Changes in annual global surface temperatures are presented as'dimate stripes", with future projections showing the human-caused long-term trends and continuing modulation by natural variability (represented here using observed levels of past natural variability). Colours on the generational icons correspond to the global surface temperature stripes for each year, withs segments on futurei icons differentiating possible future experiences. (2.1,2.1.2, Figure2 2.1, Table 2.1, Figure 2.3, Cross-Section. Box.2, 3.1, Figure 3.3, 4.1, 4.3) (Box SPM.1) Current Progress in Adaptation and Gaps and Challenges A.3 Adaptation planning and implementation has progressed across all sectors and regions, with documented benefits and varying effectiveness. Despite progress, adaptation gaps exist, and will continue to grow at current rates of implementation. Hard and soft limits to adaptation have been reached in some ecosystems and regions. Maladaptation is happening in some sectors and regions. Current global financial flows for adaptation are insufficient for, and constrain implementation of, adaptation options, especially in developing countries A.3.1 Progress in adaptation planning and implementation has been observed across all sectors and regions, generating multiple benefits (very high confidence). Growing public and political awareness of climate impacts and risks has resulted in at least 170 countries and many cities including adaptation in their climate policies and planning processes A.3.2 Effectiveness'5 of adaptation in reducing climate risks'6 is documented for specific contexts, sectors and regions (high confidence). Examples of effective adaptation options include: cultivar improvements, on-farm water management and storage, soil moisture conservation, irrigation, agroforestry, community-based adaptation, farm and landscape level diversification in agriculture, sustainable land management approaches, use of agroecological principles and practices and other approaches that work with natural processes (high confidence). Ecosystem-based adaptation" approaches such as urban greening, restoration of wetlands and upstream forest ecosystems have been effective in reducing flood risks and urban heat (high confidence). Combinations of non-structural measures like early warning systems and structural measures like levees have reduced loss of lives in case of inland flooding (medium confidence). Adaptation options such as disaster risk management, early warning systems, climate services and social safety nets have broad A.3.3 Most observed adaptation responses are fragmented, incremental", sector-specific and unequally distributed across regions. Despite progress, adaptation gaps exist across sectors and regions, and will continue to grow under current levels of implementation, with the largest adaptation gaps among lower income groups. (high confidence) (2.3.2) A.3.4 There is increased evidence of maladaptation in various sectors and regions. Maladaptation especially affects A.3.5 Soft limits to adaptation are currently being experienced by small-scale farmers and households along some low lying coastal areas (medium confidence) resulting from financial, governance, institutional and policy constraints (high confidence). Some tropical, coastal, polar and mountain ecosystems have reached hard adaptation limits (high confidence). Adaptation does not prevent all losses and damages, even with effective adaptation and before reaching (high confidence). (2.2, 2.3} (high confidence). (2.2.3) applicability across multiple sectors (high confidence). (2.2.3) marginalised and vulnerable groups adversely. (high confidence) (2.3.2) soft and hard limits (high confidence). (2.3.2) Effectiveness refers here to the extent to which an adaptation option is anticipated or observed to reduce climate-related risk. (2.2.3) See Annex : Glossary. (2.2.3) Solutions (NbS), see Annex : Glossary. Ecosystem based Adaptation (EbA)i is recognized internationally under the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD14/5). AI related concept isl Nature-based Incremental adaptations to change in climate are understood as extensions of actions and behaviours that already reduce the losses or enhance the benefits of natural variations in extreme weather/climate events. (2.3.2)

Summary for Policymakers A.3.6 Key barriers to adaptation are limited resources, lack of private sector and citizen engagement, insufficient mobilization off finance (including for research), low climate literacy, lack of political commitment, limited research and/or slow and low uptake of adaptation science, and low sense of urgency.1 There are widening disparities between the estimated costs of adaptation and the finance allocated to adaptation (high confidence). Adaptation finance has come predominantly from public sources, and a small proportion of global tracked climate finance was targeted to adaptation and an overwhelming majority to mitigation (very high confidence). Although global tracked climate finance has shown an upward trend since AR5, current global financial flows for adaptation, including from public and private finance sources, are insufficient and constrain implementation of adaptation options, especially in developing countries (high confidence). Adverse climate impacts can reduce the availability off financial resources byi incurring losses and damages and through impeding national economic growth, thereby further increasing financial constraints for adaptation, particularly for developing and least developed countries (medium confidence). (2.3.2,2.3.3) Box SPM.1 The use of scenarios and modelled pathways in the AR6 Synthesis Report Modelled scenarios and pathways" are used to explore future emissions, climate change, related impacts and risks, and possible mitigation and adaptation strategies and are based on a range of assumptions, including socio-economic variables and mitigation options. These are quantitative projections and are neither predictions nor forecasts. Global modelled emission pathways, including those based on cost effective approaches contain regionally differentiated assumptions and outcomes, and have to be assessed with the careful recognition of these assumptions. Most do not make explicit assumptions about global equity, environmental justice or intra-regional income distribution. IPCC is neutral with regard to the assumptions underlying the scenarios in the literature assessed in this report, which do not cover all possible futures.20 (Cross-Section Box.2) WGI assessed the climate response to five illustrative scenarios based on Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPS)" that cover the range of possible future development of anthropogenic drivers of climate change found in the literature. High and very high GHG emissions scenarios (SSP3-7.0 and SSP5-8.5") have CO2 emissions that roughly double from current levels by 2100 and 2050, respectively. The intermediate GHG emissions scenario (SSP2-4.5) has CO, emissions remaining around current levels until the middle of the century. The very low and low GHG emissions scenarios (SSP1-1.9 and SSP1-2.6) have CO2 emissions declining to net zero around 2050 and 2070, respectively, followed by varying levels of net negative CO2 emissions. In addition, Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPS)9 were used by WGI andV WGII to assess regional climate changes, impacts and risks. In WGIII, a large number of global modelled emissions pathways were assessed, of which 1202 pathways were categorised based on their assessed global warming over the 21st century; categories range from pathways that limit warming to 1.5degC with more than 50% likelihood (noted >50% in this report) with no or limited overshoot (C1) to Global warming levels (GWLS) relative to 1850-1900 are used to integrate the assessment of climate change and related impacts and risks since patterns of changes for many variables at a given GWL are common to all scenarios considered and pathways that exceed 4degC (C8). (Cross-Section Box.2) (Box SPM.1, Table 1) independent of timing when that level is reached. Cross-Section Box.2) In the literature, the terms pathways and scenarios are used interchangeably, with the former more frequently used in relation to climate goals. WGI primarily used the term scenarios and'WGII mostly used the term modelled emission and mitigation pathways. The SYR primarily uses scenarios when Around half of alli modelled global emission pathways assume cost-effective approaches that rely on least-cost mitigation/abatement options globally. The SSP-based scenarios are referred to as SSPx-y, where'SSPX'refers to the Shared Socioeconomic Pathway describing the socioeconomic trends underlying the scenarios, and y refers tot the level ofr radiative forcing (in watts per squarer metre, orl Wm) resulting from the scenario in the year 2100. Cross-Section Box.2) Very high emissions scenarios have become less likely but cannot be ruled out. Warming levels >4degC may result from very high emissions scenarios, but can also occur from lower emission scenarios if climate sensitivity or carbon cycle feedbacks arel higher than the best estimate. (3.1.1) RCP-based scenarios are referred to as RCPy, where y refers to the level of radiative forcing (in watts per square metre, or W m?) resulting from the scenario in the year 2100. The SSP scenarios cover a broader range of greenhouse gas and air pollutant futures than the RCPS. They are similar but not identical with differences in concentration trajectories. The overall effective radiative forcing tends tol bel higher for the SSPs compared tot the RCPS with the referring tol WGI and modelled emission and mitigation pathways when referring tol WGIII other half looks at existing policies and regionally and sectorally differentiated actions. same label (medium confidence). (Cross-Section Box.2)

Summary for Policymakers Box SPM.1, Table 1: Description andi relationship of scenarios and modelled pathways considered across. AR61 Working Group reports. (Cross-Section Box.2 Figure 1} in Category WGIII C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 Category description limit warming to 1.5degC (>50%) with no or limited overshoot*** return warming to 1.5degC(>50%) after a high overshoot* limit warming to 2degC (>67%) limit warming to 2degC (>50%) limit warming to 2.5degC (>50%) limit warming to 3degC (>50%) limit warming to 4degC (>50%) exceed warming of 4degC (>50%) GHG (SSPx-y") emissions in WGI scenarios & WGII Very low (SSP1-1.9) Low (SSP1-2.6) Intermediate (SSP2-4.5) High (SSP3-7.0) Very high (SSP5-8.5) RCPy** in WGI & WGII RCP2.6 RCP4.5 RCP8.5 See footnote 21 for the SSPx-y terminology. See footnote 23 for the RCPy terminology. cases for up to several decades. ** Limited overshoot refers to exceeding 1.5degC global warming by up to about 0.1degC, high overshoot by 0.1degC-0.3degC, inl both Current Mitigation Progress, Gaps and Challenges A.4 Policies and laws addressing mitigation have consistently expanded since AR5. Global GHG emissions in 2030 implied by nationally determined contributions (NDCS) announced by October 2021 make it likely that warming will exceed 1.5degC during the 21st century and make it harder to limit warming below 2degC. There are gaps between projected emissions from implemented policies and those from NDCS and finance flows fall short of the levels needed to meet climate goals across all sectors and regions. (high confidence) (2.2, 2.3, Figure 2.5, Table 2.2) A.4.1 Thel UNFCCC, Kyoto Protocol, and the Paris Agreement are supporting rising levels of national ambition. The Paris Agreement, adopted under the UNFCCC, with near universal participation, has led to policy development and target-setting at national and sub-national levels, in particular in relation to mitigation, as well as enhanced transparency of climate action and support (medium confidence). Many regulatory and economic instruments have already been deployed successfully (high confidence). In many countries, policies have enhanced energy efficiency, reduced rates of deforestation and accelerated technology deployment, leading to avoided and in some cases reduced or removed emissions (high contidence). Multiple lines of evidence suggest that mitigation policies have led to several4 Gt CO2-eqyr'of avoided global emissions (medium confidence). At least 18 countries have sustained absolute production-based GHG and consumption-based CO, reductions?5 for longer than 10 years. These reductions have only partly offset global emissions A.4.2 Severalr mitigation options, notably solar energy.windenergy, electrification ofurban systems, umbangeeninfastructure, energy efficiency, demand-side management, improved forest and crop/grassland management, and reduced food waste and loss, are technically viable, are becoming increasingly cost etfective and are generally supported by the At least 1.8 GtCOreq yrl can be accounted for by aggregating separate estimates for the effects of economic and regulatory instruments. Growing numbers of laws and executive orders have impacted global emissions and were estimated to resulti in 5.9 GtCO,-eqyrt less emissions in 20161 than they Reductions were linked to energy supply decarbonisation, energy efficiency gains, and energy demand reduction, which resulted from both policies and growth (high confidence). (2.2.1, 2.2.2) otherwise would havel been. (medium confidence) (2.2.2) changes in economic structure (high confidence). (2.2.2) 10

Summary for Policymakers public. From 2010 to 2019 there have been sustained decreases in the unit costs of solar energy (85%), wind energy (55%), and lithium-ion batteries (85%), and large increases in their deployment, e.g., >10x for solar and >100x for electric vehicles (EVs), varying widely across regions. The mix of policy instruments that reduced costs and stimulated adoption includes public R&D, funding for demonstration and pilot projects, and demand-pull instruments such as deployment subsidies to attain scale. Maintaining emission-intensive systems may, in some regions and sectors, be more expensive than transitioning to low emission systems. (high confidence) (2.2.2, Figure 2.4) A.4.3 A substantial'emissions gap'exists between global GHG emissions in 2030 associated with the implementation of NDCS announced prior to COP26* and those associated with modelled mitigation pathways that limit warming to 1.5degC (>50%) with no or limited overshoot or limit warming to 2degC (>67%) assuming immediate action (high confidence). This would make it likely that warming will exceed 1.5degC during the 21st century (high confidence). Global modelled mitigation pathways that limit warming to 1.5degC (>50%) with no or limited overshoot or limit warming to 2degC (>67%) assuming immediate action imply deep global GHG emissions reductions this decade (high confidence) (see SPMI Box 1, Table 1, B.6)7. Modelled pathways that are consistent with NDCS announced prior to COP26 until 2030 and assume no increase in ambition thereafter havel higher emissions, leading to a median global warming of 2.8 [2.1 to 3.4] OCI by 2100 (medium confidence). Many countries have signalled an intention to achieve net zero GHG or net zero CO; by around mid-century but pledges differ across countries in terms of scope and specificity, and limited policies are to date in place to deliver A.4.4 Policy coverage is uneven across sectors (high confidence). Policies implemented by the end of 2020 are projected to result in higher global GHG emissions in 2030 than emissions implied by NDCS, indicating an'implementation gap'(high confidence). Without a strengthening of policies, global warming of 3.2 [2.2 to 3.5] degC is projected by 2100 A.4.5 The adoption of low-emission technologies lags in most developing countries, particularly least developed ones, due in part to limited finance, technology development and transfer, and capacity (medium confidence). The magnitude of climate finance flows has increased over the last decade and financing channels have broadened but growth has slowed since 2018 (high confidence). Financial flows have developed heterogeneously across regions and sectors (high confidence). Public and private finance flows for fossil fuels are still greater than those for climate adaptation and mitigation (high confidence).The overwhelming majority of tracked climate finance is directed towards mitigation, but nevertheless falls short of the levels needed to limit warming to below 2degC or to 1.5degC across all sectors and regions (see C7.2) (very high confidence). In 2018, public and publicly mobilised private climate finance flows from developed to developing countries were below the collective goal under the UNFCCC and Paris Agreement to mobilise USD 100 billion per year by 2020 in the context of meaningful mitigation action and transparency on implementation on them. (2.3.1, Table 2.2, Figure 2.5, Table 3.1, 4.1} (medium confidence). 2.22,2.3.1,3.1.1, Figure 2.5) (Box SPM.1, Figure SPM.5) (medium confidence). 2.22,23.1,23.3) Due to the literature cutoff date ofWGII, the additional NDCS submitted after 11 October 2021 are not assessed here. (Footnote. 32 in the Longer Report) Projected 2030 GHG emissions are! 50 (47-55) GtCO-eq if all conditional NDC elements are takeni into account. Without conditional elements, the global emissions are projected to be approximately similar to modelled. 2019 levels at 53 (50-57) GtCOz-eq. (2.3.1, Table. 2.2)

Summary for Policymakers B. Future Climate Change, Risks, and Long-Term Responses Future Climate Change B.1 Continued greenhouse gas emissions will lead to increasing global warming, with the best estimate of reaching 1.5degC in the near term in considered scenarios and modelled pathways. Every increment of global warming will intensify multiple and concurrent hazards (high confidence). Deep, rapid, and sustained reductions in greenhouse gas emissions would lead to a discernible slowdown in global warming within around two decades, and also to discernible changes in atmospheric composition within a few years (high confidence). (Cross-Section Boxes 1 and 2, 3.1, 3.3, Table 3.1, Figure 3.1, 4.3) (Figure SPM.2, Box SPM.1) B.1.1 Global warming? will continue to increase in the near term (2021-2040) mainly due to increased cumulative CO, emissions in nearly all considered scenarios and modelled pathways. In the near term, global warming is more likely than not to reach 1.5degC even under the very low GHG emission scenario (SSP1-1.9) and likely or very likely to exceed 1.5degC under higher emissions scenarios. In the considered scenarios and modelled pathways, the best estimates of the time when the level of global warming of 1.5degC is reached lie in the near term?. Global warming declines back to below 1.5degC by the end of the 21st century in some scenarios and modelled pathways (see B.7). The assessed climate response to GHG emissions scenarios results in al best estimate of warming for 2081-2100 that spans a range from 1.4degC for a very low GHG emissions scenario (SSP1-1.9) to 2.7degC for an intermediate GHG emissions scenario (SSP2-4.5) and 4.4degC for a very high GHG emissions scenario (SSP5-8.5)", with narrower uncertainty ranges" than for corresponding scenarios in AR5. (Cross-Section Boxes 1 and 2, 3.1.1, 3.3.4, Table 3.1, 4.3) (Box SPM.1) B.1.2 Discernible differences in trends of global surface temperature between contrasting GHG emissions scenarios (SSP1-1.9 and SSP1-2.6 VS. SSP3-7.0 and SSP5-8.5) would begin to emerge from natural variability2 within around 20 years. Under these contrasting scenarios, discernible effects would emerge within years for GHG concentrations, and sooner for air quality improvements, due to the combined targeted air pollution controls and strong and sustained methane emissions reductions. Targeted reductions of air pollutant emissions lead to more rapid improvements in air quality within years compared to reductions in GHG emissions only, but in the long term, further improvements are projected in scenarios that combine efforts to reduce air pollutants as well as GHG emissions". (high confidence) (3.1.1} (Box SPM.1) B.1.3 Continued emissions will further affect alli major climate system components. With every additional increment of global warming, changes in extremes continue to become larger. Continued global warming is projected to further intensify the global water cycle, including its variability, global monsoon precipitation, and very wet and very dry weather and Global warming (see Annex : Glossary) is here reported as running 20-year averages, unless stated otherwise, relative to 1850-1900. Global surface temperature in any single year can vary above or below the long-term human-caused trend, due to natural variability. The internal variability of global surface temperature in a single year is estimated to be about +0.25degC (5-95% range, high confidence). The occurrence of individual years with global surface temperature change above a certain level does not imply that this global warming level has been reached. (4.3, Cross-Section Box.2) Median five-year interval at which a 1.5degC global warming level is reached (50% probability) in categories of modelled pathways considered inl WGIII is 2030-2035. By 2030, global surface temperature in anyi individual year could exceed 1.5degC relative to 1850-1900 with a probability between 40% and 60%, across the five scenarios assessed inl WGI (medium confidence). In all scenarios considered inWGI except the veryl high emissions scenario (SSP5-8.5), the midpoint of the first 20-year running average period during which the assessed average global surface temperature change reaches 1.5degC liesi in the first half of the 2030s. In the very high GHG emissions scenario, the midpoint is in the late 2020s. (3.1.1,3.3.1, 4.3) (Box SPM.1) Thel best estimates [and very likely ranges] for the different scenarios are: 1.4(1.0to 1.8 JC (SSP1-1.9); 1.8(1.3 to 24)C(6SP1-2.6;2.71 [2.1to3.5degC Assessed future changes in global surface temperature have been constructed, for the first time, by combining multi-model projections with observational constraints and the assessed equilibrium dimate sensitivity and transient climate response. The uncertainty range is narrower than in the AR5 thanks to See Annex : Glossary. Natural variability includes natural drivers and internal variability. The main internal variability phenomena include El Nino-Southern (SSP2-4.5); 3.6 [2.8 to 4.6JdegC (SSP3-7.0); and 4.4 [3.3 to 5.7] JOC (SSP5-8.5). (3.1.1) (Box SPM.1) improved knowledge of climate processes, paleoclimate evidence and model-based emergent constraints. (3.1.1) Oscillation, Pacific Decadal Variability and Atlantic Multi-decadal Variability. (4.3) Based on additional scenarios. 12

Summary for Policymakers climate events and seasons (high confidence). In scenarios with increasing CO2 emissions, natural land and ocean carbon sinks are projected to take up a decreasing proportion of these emissions (high confidence). Other projected changes include further reduced extents and/or volumes of almost all cryospheric elements* (high confidence), further global mean sea level rise (virtually certain), and increased ocean acidification (virtually certain) and deoxygenation B.1.4 With further warming, every region is projected to increasingly experience concurrent and multiple changes in climatic impact-drivers. Compound heatwaves and droughts are projected to become more frequent, including concurrent events across multiple locations (high confidence). Due to relative sea level rise, current 1-in-100 year extreme sea level events are projected to occur at least annually in more than half of all tide gauge locations by 2100 under all considered scenarios (high confidence). Other projected regional changes include intensification of tropical cyclones and/or extratropical storms (medium confidence), andi increases in aridity and fire weather (medium to high confidence). B.1.5 Natural variability will continue to modulate human-caused climate changes, either attenuating or amplifying projected changes, with little effect on centennial-scale global warming (high confidence). These modulations are important to consider in adaptation planning, especially at the regional scale and in the near term. If a large explosive volcanic eruption were to occur3, it would temporarily and partially mask human-caused climate change by reducing global (high confidence). (3.1.1,3.3.1, Figure 3.4) (Figure SPM.2) (3.1.1,3.1.3) surface temperature and precipitation for one to three years (medium confidence). (4.3) Permafrost, seasonal snow cover, glaciers, the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets, and Arctic seal ice. aerosols in thel literature assessed int this report, occur on average twice per century. (4.3) Based on 2500-year reconstructions, eruptions with a radiative forcing more negative than-1Wm?, related tot the radiative effect of volcanic stratospheric

Summary for Policymakers With every increment of global warming, regional changes in mean climate and extremes become more widespread and pronounced the last time global surface temperature wass sustained ato ord above: 2.5degC was over 3 million years ago 2011-2020 was around than 1850-1900 1.1degCwarmer The world at The worldat The world at +3degC The world at +4degC +1.5degC +2degC Global warming level (GWL) above 1850-1900 a) Annual hottest-day temperature change Annual hottest dayt temperature is projected toi increase most urbanisation (1.5-21 times the GWL) in some mid-I latitude and semi-arid regions, andi in the South American Monsoon region. change eq further heat extremes intensifies b). Annual mean total column soil moisture change Projections of annual mean soil moisture largely follow change (o) projections in annual mean precipitation but also show some differences due tot the influence of evapotranspiration. 1.0 0.5 0 0.5 1.0 small absolute changes may appear %orachanges largea as indryregions c). Annual wettest-day precipitation change Annual wettest day precipitation is projected toi increase >change (%) in almost all continental regions, even in regions where projected annual mean soil moisture dedines. -40-30-20 -10 0102030 40 Figure SPM.2: Projected changes of annual maximum daily maximum temperature, annual mean total column soil moisture and annual maximum 1-day precipitation at global warming levels of 1.5degC, 2degC, 3degC, and 4degC relative to 1850-1900. Projected (a) annual maximum daily temperature change (*C).(b). annual mean total column soil moisture change (standard deviation), (c) annual maximum 1-day precipitation change (%). The panels show CMIP6 multi-model median changes. In panels (b) and (c), large positive relative changes in dry regions may correspond to small absolute changes. In panel (b), the unit is the standard deviation of interannual variability in soil moisture during 1850-1900. Standard deviation is a widely used metric in characterising drought severity. A projected reduction in mean soil moisture by one standard deviation corresponds to soil moisture conditions typical of droughts that occurred about once every six years during 1850-1900. The WGI Interactive Atlas CTPUSNEXBexNAReGS) can be used to explore additional changes in the climate system across the range of global warming levels presented in this figure. (Figure 3.1, Cross-Section Box.2) Climate Change Impacts and Climate-Related Risks B.2 For any given future warming level, many climate-related risks are higher than assessed in AR5, and projected long-term impacts are up to multiple times higher than currently observed (high confidence). Risks and projected adverse impacts and related losses and damages from climate change escalate with every increment of global warming (very high confidence). Climatic and non-climatic risks will increasingly interact, creating compound and cascading risks that are more complex and difficult to manage (high confidence). (Cross-Section Box.2, 3.1, 4.3, Figure 3.3, Figure 4.3) (Figure SPM.3, Figure SPM.4) 14